First Section of Statistics Chapter (#119)
JuliaDataScience/JuliaDataScience: contents/stats_distributions.md

Regarding notation, **we define $A$ as an event and $P(A)$ as the probability of event $A$**, thus:

$$ \{P(A) \in \mathbb{R} : 0 \leq P(A) \leq 1 \}. $$ {#eq:probability}

This means the "probability of the event to occur is the set of all real numbers between 0 and 1; including 0 and 1".
In addition, we have three axioms, originated from @kolmogorovFoundationsTheoryProbability1933:

1. **Non-negativity**: For all $A$, $P(A) \geq 0$. Every probability is positive (greater than or equal to zero), regardless of the event.
2. **Additivity**: For two mutually exclusive events $A$ and $B$ (cannot occur at the same time): $P(A) = 1 - P(B)$ and $P(B) = 1 - P(A)$.
3. **Normalization**: The probability of all possible events $A_1, A_2, \dots$ must add up to 1: $\sum_{n \in \mathbb{N}} P(A_n) = 1$; or, in the case of a continuous variable, integrate to 1: $\int^\infty_{-\infty} f(x) dx = 1$.

Now we are ready to talk about distributions.

> A **distribution is a function which maps real numbers to a probability**:

Reviewer: Simply put: a distribution is a just a collection of scores (counts) in a variable(observations). Later,  a **probability distribution** is defined by a function that will map each observation to a given probability, or course after proper normalisation of the distribution.

Author: Thanks done in 03a33c71f3a147f7b31cc9cf8064fc867f6c30f1

$$ f(X): X \to \mathbb{R} \in [0, 1], $$ {#eq:distribution}

where $\mathbb{R}$ is the set of real numbers and $[0, 1] \in \mathbb{R}$ is the closed interval of real numbers between 0 and 1.
In other words, distributions are a mapping between values and their respective probabilities.
We generally denote that a random variable $X$ follows a specific distribution by the following notation:

$$ X \sim \operatorname{dist}(\theta_1, \theta_2, \dots), $$ {#eq:distribution_notation}

where $\operatorname{dist}$ is the name of the distribution and $\theta_1, \theta_2, \dots$ are the parameters that control how the distribution behaves.
Every distribution can be "parameterized" by specifying parameters that allow us to tailor some aspects of the distribution for some specific purpose.

Also, notice that we are using upper case $X$ instead of lower case $x$.
This is a wide used convention in probability and statistics, that **upper case characters denote random variables, and lower case characters denote numerical values of a random variable**.
More broadly, $X$ is a theoretical distribution, whereas $x$ are the observed values from $X$.

> There are several distributions defined in textbooks[^stats_book] and scientific articles[^stats_articles].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are several distributions defined in textbooks [for example, @bertsekas2000introduction] and scientific articles [for example, @lewandowskiGeneratingRandomCorrelation2009].
```

Reviewer 2: I think I got the syntax right here, but I didn't check

Reviewer 2: I checked. It should be correct.

Author: What's the difference. The other footnotes are like the way I wrote. I think we should be consistent

We'll cover just a few of them in this section.
In Julia, we have a package that provides a large collection of distributions and related function called [`Distributions.jl`](https://juliastats.org/Distributions.jl/dev/), which we will use to showcase some distributions:

[^stats_book]: we recommend @bertsekas2000introduction.
[^stats_articles]: one example is the $\operatorname{LKJ}$ distribution [@lewandowskiGeneratingRandomCorrelation2009].

```julia
using Distributions
```

### Normal and Non-Normal Distributions {#sec:stats_dist_normal}

> In applied sciences, there is a widely used distribution called the **normal distribution**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most commonly arising distribution is the **normal distribution**.
It occurs a lot in nature; for example, the height and weight of humans and the size of snowflakes.
```

It has the ubiquitous shape of a bell curve and is also known as the *Gaussian* distribution in honor of the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss.

This distribution is generally used in the social and natural sciences to represent variables in which their distributions are not known.
Some phenomena follow a normal distribution, such as human height, human shoe size or test scores.

> We urge the reader to perceive that *not all phenomena are normally distributed*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, beware that *not all phenomena are normally distributed*.
```

For example, income, financial returns, city size, social media followers are examples of important phenomena that, generally, do not follow a normal distribution.

> Instead, they follow what we will call as non-normal distribution, or, as some also denote, a long-tailed distribution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead, they follow what we will call a non-normal distribution, or, as some also denote, a long-tailed distribution.
```

In @fig:plot_normal_lognormal, we can see the comparison between a distribution that follows a normal distribution and a distribution that is long-tailed, i.e. does *not* follow a normal distribution.

```jl
fig = plot_normal_lognormal()
caption = "Normal and Non-Normal Distributed Distributions."
label = "plot_normal_lognormal"

> Options(fig; filename=label, caption, label)

Reviewer 2: FYI, since yesterday, you can also show the code here without using `# hide` thanks to https://github.com/rikhuijzer/Books.jl/pull/209.

Then, it would be
```
let
    caption = "Normal and Non-Normal Distributed Distributions."
    label = "plot_normal_lognormal"
    pre(fig) = Options(fig; filename=label, caption, label)
    @sco pre=pre plot_normal_lognormal()
end
```
cc @lazarusA

```

### Discrete and Continuous {#sec:stats_dist_discrete_continuous}

> Regarding distributions we have mainly two types of distributions: **discrete** and **continuous**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding distributions, we have mainly two types of distributions: **discrete** and **continuous**.
```

```jl
fig = plot_pmf()
caption = "Probability Mass Function of a 6-sided Dice."
label = "plot_pmf"
Options(fig; filename=label, caption, label)
```

A distribution is called **continuous if the set of value that it can take as inputs is uncountably infinite**.
Examples of continuous distributions are the weight or height or a person, the waiting time for the next bus to arrive or the infection rate of a contagious disease.

Analogously, in the continuous case, the inputs have a "density", thus we characterize continuous distributions with the **probability density function** (pdf).

$$ \operatorname{pdf} = P(a \leq X \leq b) = \int_a^b f(x) dx $$ {#eq:pdf}

Since a continuous distribution takes uncountably infinite this means that the pdf of a specific value is always *zero* and the pdf is only defined on an interval.
That's why we have an integral in @eq:pdf.

For example, in @fig:plot_pdf, we have a normal distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.
Notice that, since this is a valid probability, the gray shaded area that represents all the possible values integrates to 1.

> The red shaded area is the probability, under this distribution, of we observing values from 1 to 2 and we need to calculate the total area.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The red shaded area is the probability, under this distribution, of observing values from 1 to 2 and we need to calculate the total area.
```

## Distributions {#sec:stats_dist}

Before defining distributions, we must talk about **probability**.

> **The probability of an event is a real number ($\in \mathbb{R}$) between 0 and 1, where, roughly, 0 indicates the impossibility of the event and 1 indicates the certainty of the event**.

Reviewer: R is the set of real numbers, but then what is a set? Probably a reference to R?

Author: This section is not ready. I've just dumped some stuff from https://github.com/storopoli/Bayesian-Julia to polish afterwards.

The greater the likelihood of an event, the more likely it is that the event will occur.
A simple example is the tossing of a fair (impartial) coin.
Since the coin is fair, both results ("heads" and "tails") are equally likely; the probability of "heads" is equal to the probability of "tails"; and since no other result is possible, the probability of "heads" or "tails" is $\frac{1}{2}$ (which can also be written as 0.5 or 50%).

Regarding notation, **we define $A$ as an event and $P(A)$ as the probability of event $A$**, thus:

$$ \{P(A) \in \mathbb{R} : 0 \leq P(A) \leq 1 \}. $$ {#eq:probability}

> This means the "probability of the event to occur is the set of all real numbers between 0 and 1; including 0 and 1".

Reviewer: is the set of all real numbers in the close interval $[0,1]$. (but probably too formal).

Author: We can stick with this definition because it plays nice with the Kolmogorov axioms below. But, yes, it is the set of all real number between 0 and 1 (both inclusive).

I will add a more intuitive explanation and also some sugarcoating stuff to explain better.

In addition, we have three axioms, originated from @kolmogorovFoundationsTheoryProbability1933:

1. **Non-negativity**: For all $A$, $P(A) \geq 0$. Every probability is positive (greater than or equal to zero), regardless of the event.

> 2. **Additivity**: For two mutually exclusive $A$ and $B$ (cannot occur at the same time): $P(A) = 1 - P(B)$ and $P(B) = 1 - P(A)$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Additivity**: For two mutually exclusive events $A$ and $B$ (cannot occur at the same time): $P(A) = 1 - P(B)$ and $P(B) = 1 - P(A)$.
```
